src/pages/projects/yggdrasil.mdx, before:

---
layout: "../../layouts/Project/ProjectLayout.astro"
title: "Yggdrasil"
subtitle: "My first custom keyboard, 36% layout" description: "TODO"
publishDate: "15 October 2022"
thumbnail: "/images/projects/yggdrasil/thumbnail.jpg"
thumbnailAR: "16-9"
---
export const title = "Yggdrasil" 
import Link from "../../components/Link/Link.astro"
import LinkableTitle from "../../components/LinkableTitle/LinkableTitle.astro"
import { Image } from "@astrojs/image/components"
import fingerPaint from "../../assets/images/projects/yggdrasil/finger_paint.jpg"


export const components = { a: Link, h2: LinkableTitle };

{/*What is the structure?

X- Small intro to what it is and why I did it. Why 36%. Link to my github
- Roughly go through the process of what I needed to do in order to bring the keyboard to life
- Challenges that appeared along the way
- My current layout (find a way to get a fancy image or draw it yourself!)
  - And what's missing from it that I want to improve/add
- Reference links
- Try and give prices for things so that people will have a sense of how much it would cost
- Talk about the community and that there are so many different keyboard designs out there


Structure:

-
*/}

<LinkableTitle id="the-split">The Split</LinkableTitle>

Split keyboards have always been at the top when it comes to ergonomics and with designing and creating a board being easier now than ever, more and more people are trying their luck at creating such boards based on their ideas and tastes.

<LinkableTitle id="beginning-of-the-journey">Beginning of the journey</LinkableTitle>

The first time split/ergonomic keyboards piqued my interest was when I first watched ThePrimeagen's video, [*My workflow using Vim, 2021*](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2WPC8rZQvQU), where he uses a split keyboard know as the [Dactyl](https://github.com/adereth/dactyl-keyboard). I went to see his other videos and was so astounded with his speed and how the keyboard looked that I just had to find out more about these sort of keyboards.

And so, after watching some split keyboard videos, I found another channel on YouTube which had keyboard content more geared towards ergonomics. The channel in question is [Ben Vallack's](https://www.youtube.com/@BenVallack) and in there he goes into several rabbit holes about ergonomics of keyboard layouts such as Colemak DH and also the keyboards themselves, such as using an ortholinear keyboard, a split keyboard with 72 keys and then slowly tinkering down the number of keys and see what benefits that gets you.

So far so good and little ol' me was just looking at these things purely for how they looked so unique and different from everything I'd seen. But then I stumbled upon a video guide detailing how to [design and make your custom keyboard](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UKfeJrRIcxw), and that's when the thought popped into my mind, that this doesn't really seem that difficult. And so I started the process of creating my very first, split, keyboard with 36 keys (on each hand).

<LinkableTitle id="beginning-of-the-journey">Decisions</LinkableTitle>

<LinkableTitle id="key-disposition" size="sm">Key disposition</LinkableTitle>

The first thing I had to decide was how the layout was going to be and how many keys I wanted. I looked into another of Ben's video in which he has this section in which he [paints](https://youtu.be/1C2bJkzIaPE?t=173) his fingers and sees how they span. So I tried it myself and I got this result:

<div class="project-img-container">
  <Image src={fingerPaint} alt="Finger painting of finger span" format="webp" loading="lazy" class="project__img"/>
</div>

I made some rough measurements so I had some idea of the dimensions of the keyboard.

With this I knew that I wanted some finger span and also column stagger <small>(which is when the columns are of different heights)</small>.

And the last decision that is left, other than the final key layout with layers, which will only come later, is the number of keys.

<LinkableTitle id="Keys" size="sm">Keys</LinkableTitle>

To find out how many keys I was again looking through some split keyboard videos and found another great one about [why use a split keyboard](https://youtu.be/rrska7UU7BE). But the part that pertained to [key numbers and benefits](https://youtu.be/rrska7UU7BE?t=125) states that with a 30% <small>(minus thumb keys)</small> each finger won't be more than one key away from another. For example, say that your fingers are resting in the home row and you wan't to type a number. With regular keyboard, you can't just touch the key around it in any direction and have it output a number, without any extra configuration at least. But with a split keyboard this is possible. Because of this, I had made my decision to go forward with a 36% layout. That is 30 keys plus 3 keys in the thumb cluster.

<LinkableTitle id="designing">Designing</LinkableTitle>

The design part was done without being too strict about measurements <small>(although if I do another in the future I'd like for it to be more strict about that)</small>. That is, some part of the design was done by "looks good" or like we say here in Portugal, <i>a olhómetro</i>.

I started with using Ergogen but couldn't figure out how to make that work so I just used it to get a rough shape for the layout.

After that I moved into Kicad, wiring up the circuit for the micro-controller, all the switches and other components. For reference I looked at [Lily58](https://github.com/kata0511/Lily58) and [Corne](https://github.com/foostan/crkbd) schematics.

TODO:

- Add link to the cherry/choc switch kicad "image"
- Add image of how it looks in the schematics and the wiring diagram in kicad and the 3d render for the board
- Then add a real picture of the pcb once received

For the assembly of this board, you can go to the Yggdrasil repository for the [build guide](https://github.com/LoyalPotato/yggdrasil). It goes in depth for every step necessary to assemble the keyboard, from soldering to flashing the micro-controller.

<LinkableTitle id="keymap">Keymap</LinkableTitle>

For the keymap, I tried to make it so that I can do both MacOS and Windows shortcuts.
TODO:

- Make a sketch with the keys used and each layer

<LinkableTitle id="keymap-shorcomings" size="sm">Shortcomings</LinkableTitle>

Although I've made the mapping work so far, it's not perfect/close to finished. There are still some shortcuts that I am not able to do, but I think most of it can be solved if I figure out all the possibilities with QMK.

<LinkableTitle id="total-cost">Total Cost</LinkableTitle>

TODO: Make the list just a regular - list, not with dots

I'll leave here how much I spent for all the parts, minus the tools, such as soldering iron, and a link to the parts as well.
Some notes about the prices:
- Some of these items are bought in bulk, like the diodes, so this is just a price for the specific number of parts required.
- The items don't include shipping
- The price includes the VAT for Portugal so it may vary when you go check

| Parts | Price |
| --- | --- | 
| PCB x2 | {new Intl.NumberFormat(undefined, { style: 'currency', currency: 'EUR' }).format(5.13)} |
| USB-C ProMicro x2 | {new Intl.NumberFormat(undefined, { style: 'currency', currency: 'EUR' }).format(15.76)}  |
| TRRS Jacks x2 | {new Intl.NumberFormat(undefined, { style: 'currency', currency: 'EUR' }).format(0.04)} |
| Kailh Sockets x36 | {new Intl.NumberFormat(undefined, { style: 'currency', currency: 'EUR' }).format(6.21)}  |
| Diodes x36 | {new Intl.NumberFormat(undefined, { style: 'currency', currency: 'EUR' }).format(0.47)} |
| Tact Switch x2 | {new Intl.NumberFormat(undefined, { style: 'currency', currency: 'EUR' }).format(0.04)} |

Also, as I had a 3d printer, I was able to print the plates. Because of that, I did not include it in the price table and total. The same goes for switches and keycaps, it's expected that you will have these already or intend to buy them.

Having said that the total comes out to {new Intl.NumberFormat(undefined, {style: 'currency', currency: 'EUR'}).format(37.65)} <small>(again, no shipping included)</small> for building both boards :).

<LinkableTitle id="references">References</LinkableTitle>

Here are a few links that helped me with at least one step in the design and build.

TODO: Fix styling for bullet lists

- [Ergogen](https://github.com/ergogen/ergogen) and the kind people from their [discord](https://discord.gg/nbKcAZB)
- [Ben Vallack's](https://github.com/benvallack/ergogen) flipper ergogen config and his youtube [video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UKfeJrRIcxw)
- [Corne Kbd](https://github.com/foostan/crkbd)
- [ruiqimao's guide](https://github.com/ruiqimao/keyboard-pcb-guide)
- [tapioki's Architeuthis dux](https://github.com/tapioki/cephalopoda/tree/main/Architeuthis%20dux)
- [Lily58](https://github.com/kata0510/Lily58)
- [Keyboard Atelier's Discord](https://discord.gg/b7vwhHS)

Commit message:

Project - Yggdrasil - Table of contents

src/pages/projects/yggdrasil.mdx, after:

---
layout: "../../layouts/Project/ProjectLayout.astro"
title: "Yggdrasil"
subtitle: "My first custom keyboard, 36% layout" description: "TODO"
publishDate: "15 October 2022"
thumbnail: "/images/projects/yggdrasil/thumbnail.jpg"
thumbnailAR: "16-9"
---
export const title = "Yggdrasil" 
import Link from "../../components/Link/Link.astro"
import LinkableTitle from "../../components/LinkableTitle/LinkableTitle.astro"
import { Image } from "@astrojs/image/components"
import fingerPaint from "../../assets/images/projects/yggdrasil/finger_paint.jpg"


export const components = { a: Link, h2: LinkableTitle };

{/*What is the structure?

X- Small intro to what it is and why I did it. Why 36%. Link to my github
- Roughly go through the process of what I needed to do in order to bring the keyboard to life
- Challenges that appeared along the way
- My current layout (find a way to get a fancy image or draw it yourself!)
  - And what's missing from it that I want to improve/add
- Reference links
- Try and give prices for things so that people will have a sense of how much it would cost
- Talk about the community and that there are so many different keyboard designs out there


Structure:

-
*/}

<LinkableTitle id="table-of-contents">Table of Contents</LinkableTitle>

Feel free to jump to another section of the article!

- [The Split](#the-split)
- [Beginning of the journey](#beginning-of-the-journey)
- [Decisions](#decisions)
- [Key disposition](#key-disposition)
- [Keys](#keys)
- [Designing](#designing)
- [Keymap](#keymap)
- [Shortcomings](#keymap-shortcomings)
- [Total cost](#total-cost)
- [Final thoughts](#final-thoughts)
- [References](#references)

<LinkableTitle id="the-split">The Split</LinkableTitle>

Split keyboards have always been at the top when it comes to ergonomics and with designing and creating a board being easier now than ever, more and more people are trying their luck at creating such boards based on their ideas and tastes.

<LinkableTitle id="beginning-of-the-journey">Beginning of the journey</LinkableTitle>

The first time split/ergonomic keyboards piqued my interest was when I first watched ThePrimeagen's video, [*My workflow using Vim, 2021*](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2WPC8rZQvQU), where he uses a split keyboard know as the [Dactyl](https://github.com/adereth/dactyl-keyboard). I went to see his other videos and was so astounded with his speed and how the keyboard looked that I just had to find out more about these sort of keyboards.

And so, after watching some split keyboard videos, I found another channel on YouTube which had keyboard content more geared towards ergonomics. The channel in question is [Ben Vallack's](https://www.youtube.com/@BenVallack) and in there he goes into several rabbit holes about ergonomics of keyboard layouts such as Colemak DH and also the keyboards themselves, such as using an ortholinear keyboard, a split keyboard with 72 keys and then slowly tinkering down the number of keys and see what benefits that gets you.

So far so good and little ol' me was just looking at these things purely for how they looked so unique and different from everything I'd seen. But then I stumbled upon a video guide detailing how to [design and make your custom keyboard](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UKfeJrRIcxw), and that's when the thought popped into my mind, that this doesn't really seem that difficult. And so I started the process of creating my very first, split, keyboard with 36 keys (on each hand).

<LinkableTitle id="beginning-of-the-journey">Decisions</LinkableTitle>

<LinkableTitle id="key-disposition" size="sm">Key disposition</LinkableTitle>

The first thing I had to decide was how the layout was going to be and how many keys I wanted. I looked into another of Ben's video in which he has this section in which he [paints](https://youtu.be/1C2bJkzIaPE?t=173) his fingers and sees how they span. So I tried it myself and I got this result:

<div class="project-img-container">
  <Image src={fingerPaint} alt="Finger painting of finger span" format="webp" loading="lazy" class="project__img"/>
</div>

I made some rough measurements so I had some idea of the dimensions of the keyboard.

With this I knew that I wanted some finger span and also column stagger <small>(which is when the columns are of different heights)</small>.

And the last decision that is left, other than the final key layout with layers, which will only come later, is the number of keys.

<LinkableTitle id="Keys" size="sm">Keys</LinkableTitle>

To find out how many keys I was again looking through some split keyboard videos and found another great one about [why use a split keyboard](https://youtu.be/rrska7UU7BE). But the part that pertained to [key numbers and benefits](https://youtu.be/rrska7UU7BE?t=125) states that with a 30% <small>(minus thumb keys)</small> each finger won't be more than one key away from another. For example, say that your fingers are resting in the home row and you wan't to type a number. With regular keyboard, you can't just touch the key around it in any direction and have it output a number, without any extra configuration at least. But with a split keyboard this is possible. Because of this, I had made my decision to go forward with a 36% layout. That is 30 keys plus 3 keys in the thumb cluster.

<LinkableTitle id="designing">Designing</LinkableTitle>

The design part was done without being too strict about measurements <small>(although if I do another in the future I'd like for it to be more strict about that)</small>. That is, some part of the design was done by "looks good" or like we say here in Portugal, <i>a olhómetro</i>.

I started with using Ergogen but couldn't figure out how to make that work so I just used it to get a rough shape for the layout.

After that I moved into Kicad, wiring up the circuit for the micro-controller, all the switches and other components. For reference I looked at [Lily58](https://github.com/kata0511/Lily58) and [Corne](https://github.com/foostan/crkbd) schematics.

TODO:

- Add link to the cherry/choc switch kicad "image"
- Add image of how it looks in the schematics and the wiring diagram in kicad and the 3d render for the board
- Then add a real picture of the pcb once received

For the assembly of this board, you can go to the Yggdrasil repository for the [build guide](https://github.com/LoyalPotato/yggdrasil). It goes in depth for every step necessary to assemble the keyboard, from soldering to flashing the micro-controller.

<LinkableTitle id="keymap">Keymap</LinkableTitle>

For the keymap, I tried to make it so that I can do both MacOS and Windows shortcuts.
TODO:

- Make a sketch with the keys used and each layer

<LinkableTitle id="keymap-shorcomings" size="sm">Shortcomings</LinkableTitle>

Although I've made the mapping work so far, it's not perfect/close to finished. There are still some shortcuts that I am not able to do, but I think most of it can be solved if I figure out all the possibilities with QMK.

<LinkableTitle id="total-cost">Total Cost</LinkableTitle>

TODO: Make the list just a regular - list, not with dots

I'll leave here how much I spent for all the parts, minus the tools, such as soldering iron, and a link to the parts as well.
Some notes about the prices:
- Some of these items are bought in bulk, like the diodes, so this is just a price for the specific number of parts required.
- The items don't include shipping
- The price includes the VAT for Portugal so it may vary when you go check

| Parts | Price |
| --- | --- | 
| PCB x2 | {new Intl.NumberFormat(undefined, { style: 'currency', currency: 'EUR' }).format(5.13)} |
| USB-C ProMicro x2 | {new Intl.NumberFormat(undefined, { style: 'currency', currency: 'EUR' }).format(15.76)}  |
| TRRS Jacks x2 | {new Intl.NumberFormat(undefined, { style: 'currency', currency: 'EUR' }).format(0.04)} |
| Kailh Sockets x36 | {new Intl.NumberFormat(undefined, { style: 'currency', currency: 'EUR' }).format(6.21)}  |
| Diodes x36 | {new Intl.NumberFormat(undefined, { style: 'currency', currency: 'EUR' }).format(0.47)} |
| Tact Switch x2 | {new Intl.NumberFormat(undefined, { style: 'currency', currency: 'EUR' }).format(0.04)} |

Also, as I had a 3d printer, I was able to print the plates. Because of that, I did not include it in the price table and total. The same goes for switches and keycaps, it's expected that you will have these already or intend to buy them.

Having said that the total comes out to {new Intl.NumberFormat(undefined, {style: 'currency', currency: 'EUR'}).format(37.65)} <small>(again, no shipping included)</small> for building both boards :).

<LinkableTitle id="references">References</LinkableTitle>

Here are a few links that helped me with at least one step in the design and build.

TODO: Fix styling for bullet lists

- [Ergogen](https://github.com/ergogen/ergogen) and the kind people from their [discord](https://discord.gg/nbKcAZB)
- [Ben Vallack's](https://github.com/benvallack/ergogen) flipper ergogen config and his youtube [video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UKfeJrRIcxw)
- [Corne Kbd](https://github.com/foostan/crkbd)
- [ruiqimao's guide](https://github.com/ruiqimao/keyboard-pcb-guide)
- [tapioki's Architeuthis dux](https://github.com/tapioki/cephalopoda/tree/main/Architeuthis%20dux)
- [Lily58](https://github.com/kata0510/Lily58)
- [Keyboard Atelier's Discord](https://discord.gg/b7vwhHS)
